
revised 6/23/92

DEVELOPING ALGORITHMS FOR MEASURING FRACTAL DIMENSION 
-- notes by j.j. sarraille

WHAT ARE FRACTALS?  DOES ANYBODY KNOW EXACTLY? 
Ironically, the definition of the word "fractal" is somewhat
fuzzy.  I won't attempt to give a rigorous definition of the
term.

HERE IS WHAT WE THINK FRACTALS ARE.
In popular terms, fractals are sets that appear to have complex
structure no matter what scale is used to examine them.  One
consequence of this definition is that true fractals must be
infinite sets.  Often, but not always, fractals have the same
granularity across scales, or are even self-similar across
scales, so that one tends to see the same quality of structure
in a fractal as one zooms in on it.  Well-behaved fractals such
as these are the ones that have a well-defined fractal
dimension.

FRACTAL CURVES CAN FILL SPACE.
Many fractals are CONTINUOUS sets which are nevertheless very
much lacking in SMOOTHNESS, to the point that they fill up more
space than one would normally expect.  For example, we tend to
expect a "curve" to be one-dimensional.  A FRACTAL curve can
have a graph that appears to occupy the entire area of a square
in two-dimensional space.  

HOW DO FRACTALS RELATE TO CHAOTIC SYSTEMS? 
The phase-plane and Poincare maps of chaotic systems have a
fractal structure.  We can hope to recognize, classify and
understand such maps of chaos by measuring their fractal
properties.  This in turn shows promise for increasing our
understanding of the complex forces, processes, and phenomena
that affect ourselves, our world, and even the universe.

FRACTAL DIMENSION IS A TOOL FOR RECOGNIZING CHAOS. 
The FRACTAL DIMENSION is such a fractal property.  It's use as
a classification tool holds promise because it is relatively
easy to estimate the fractal dimension of a set S, because we
know that a chaotic system gave rise to the set S if this
dimension is not an integer, and because the value of the
dimension gives us some indication of what type of chaotic
system gave rise to S.

THESE NOTES ARE AN OVERVIEW OF METHODS AND ALGORITHMS FOR
COMPUTING FRACTAL DIMENSION. 
I'll review a few methods that can be used to calculate fractal
dimension.  The methods are not equivalent.  The different
methods can give different values for the fractal dimension of
a given set, even in cases where the values are absolutely
precise.  However, the methods are strongly related, and often
do yield the same results.

WHAT DOES FRACTAL DIMENSION MEASURE? 
In all cases that I know about, fractal dimension is an
indication of how much space a given set "comes near".  For
example, a ball of twine appears 3-dimensional because it
"comes near" enough of the volume of a sphere to deceive our
eyes.  The Cantor set is another example.  All its points lie
on a straight line, but it is so full of gaps that no complete
line segment, no matter how short, is contained in it.  This is
reflected in the fact that its fractal dimension is about 0.63,
quite a bit less than 1.

CAPACITY DIMENSION

THE CARDINALITY OF A COVERING IS INVERSELY PROPORTIONAL TO e^D. 
Suppose you have a line segment.  Suppose that you try to cover
it with squares of a certain size, and find that you need three
of them to do it.  If you then tried to see how many squares of
half the original size were required to cover the segment, it
would not surprise you to find that it requires six -- twice as
many.  Thus the number of squares required to cover the segment
is inversely proportional to the size of the squares.  The
covering of any smooth, continuous curve works the same way,
provided that the size of the squares is small enough so that
the curve is approximated well by straight line segments at
that scale.  

Thus, for one-dimensional objects, we see that  

N(e) = k/e

(approximately), where e is the side of the square, N(e) is the
number of squares of that size required to cover the set, and k
is some constant.  Now suppose that you are covering a scrap of
paper with little squares.  In this case, if you halve the size
of the squares, it takes four of the smaller squares to cover
what one of the larger squares would cover, and so you would
expect N(e) to increase by a factor of four when e is halved.
This is consistent with an equation of the form:  

N(e) = k/[e^2].

(Note the use of "x^y" to denote the raising of x to the power
y.)  From this analysis, it seems reasonable to hypothesize
that for more arbitrary sets:

N(e) = k/[e^D],

where D is the (possibly fractional) dimension of the set.  In
other words, we can hope to measure how much of two-dimensional
space some subset of it comes near by examining how efficiently
the set can be covered by cells of varying size.

HOW CAN WE USE THE RELATION N=e^D TO FIND D? 
By solving the formula for D, and taking the limit as e-->0, we
get the CAPACITY METHOD of estimating D.  It seems to take into
account the fractal's infinitesimal, or asymptotic, structure.
This yields the formula:  

D = lim    log[N(e)]
    e-->0  ---------
           log(1/e)

(By the way, if we assume that the set is scaled so that it
fits into a square with side 1, then we get N(1)= k= 1.  In any
case, the constant k will disappear from the equation when the
limit is taken.)


HOW DO WE ESTIMATE D WHEN WE ONLY HAVE A FINITE SET? 
In the case of real data, we must always work with a finite set
S (which we may or may not be able to interpret as a SAMPLE of
the points from some infinite set).  In the case of a finite
set, the limit above is always ZERO because eventually e will
be so small that there will only be one point in each occupied
cell.  Once e becomes sufficiently small, N(e) becomes equal to
||S||, the number of points in the set, and the limit above is
the same as


D = lim    log(||S||)
    e-->0  ---------,
           log(1/e)

which equals zero, because log(||S||) is a constant and
log(1/e) grows without bound as e tends to zero.  This is just
a reflection of the fact that all finite sets are zero
dimensional -- they have the same dimension as a single point.
To estimate fractal dimension with a computer algorithm, we
digitize as large a sample of the set as is practical,
calculate (or estimate) the values of N(e) for some RANGE of
values of e, and take as our estimate of the fractal dimension
some sort of average of those values of 

log[N(e)] 
--------- 
log(1/e)  

(In cases where the scaling has not made the proportionality
constant k in the relation 

N(e)= k*e^D 

equal to 1, the trick is to average instead the slope of a plot
of log[N(e)] versus log(1/e). This effectively corrects for the
constant, the slope being the desired estimate of D.)

DISADVANTAGES OF CAPACITY DIMENSION:  

1.  It does not account for the FREQUENCY with which the set in
question might "visit" the covering cells, and thus local
properties of the set -- properties pertaining to neighborhoods
of individual points -- are not distinguishable.

2.  Calculating truly minimal coverings of a set is
computationally intensive.

ADVANTAGES OF CAPACITY DIMENSION (FOR OUR GROUP): 

1.  We have a simplified algorithm [L-T] that has been found
accurate by empirical measures, is easy to program, and is
potentially very fast. 

2.  We have been able to adapt the algorithm to give us other
versions of fractal dimension with nearly the same speed, and
apparently the same accuracy.


INFORMATION DIMENSION

BACKGROUND: HOW IS IT THAT -log(P) MEASURES INFORMATION OR
SURPRISE??  A measure of the amount of information (surprise)
associated with the occurrence of an event E with probability
P(E) is 

I(E)= -log[P(E)] = log[1/P(E)].

To understand why I(E) is a good measure of "surprise", note
that if P(E) = 1, then the event is certain, and I(E) = 0 --
there is no surprise at all when the event occurs.  If P(E)=0,
then since infinity is the limit of I(E) as P(E) approaches 0,
this expresses our infinite surprise to witness the
impossible.  The information function I(E) also has the nice
property that when an event E is the result of the simultaneous
occurrence of two independent events F and G, I(E) =
I(F)+I(G).  This agrees with our intuitive feeling that the
information conveyed by the simultaneous occurrence of two
independent events is the sum of what is conveyed by each event
individually.

FORMULATION OF INFORMATION DIMENSION. 
In this method, one covers the sample set S with a minimal
number N(e) of cells of size e.  Let ||S|| denote the number of
elements in S, and for each of the N(e) cells, let N(e,i) be
the number of points in cell number i.  Set P(e,i) =
N(e,i)/||S|| -- the sample probability that a point of S is in
the i'th cell.

I(e) MEASURES AVERAGE SURPRISE IN LEARNING WHICH e-CELL A POINT
IS IN.  The quantity -log[P(e,i)] measures the information
conveyed by knowing that a point of S is in the i'th cell of
the covering, and the AVERAGE

          N(e)                    
          ___                     
          \                       
 I(e) =   /___ -P(e,i)log(P(e,i)) 
           i=1                     

measures the average information conveyed by knowing what cell
a point of S is in.

INFORMATION DIMENSION IS A GENERALIZATION OF CAPACITY DIMENSION. 
Now note that when all the probabilities are equal, each P(e,i)
is equal to 1/N(e), and the sum above is just I(e)=log[N(e)].
This is, in fact, the maximum possible value of I(e).  We can
interpret the lower values that might occur as quantifying the
non-uniformity of the distribution of the points, or
alternatively, as correcting the dimension estimate by giving
less weight to the cells that contain relatively few points.

Thus if we define a fractal dimension by:  

D =  lim      I(e)    
    e-->0  ----------,
            log(1/e)  

we get a formulation of fractal dimension that is similar to
the capacity dimension:  

D = lim    log[N(e)]   
   e-->0  ------------,
           log(1/e)    

but which gives a value different from the capacity dimension
when the distribution of the set over the covering is
non-uniform.

HOW IS THE FORMULA FOR INFORMATION DIMENSION USED IN PRACTICE
TO YIELD AN ESTIMATE OF FRACTAL DIMENSION? 
This is done just as described previously -- averaging
techniques are used in place of the limit calculation, which is
not feasible when working with a finite sample (the calculation
of the limit may be computationally intractable anyway, even
when we know how to specify the infinite set precisely).


CORRELATION DIMENSION

FORMULATION OF CORRELATION DIMENSION. 
Correlation dimension can be calculated using the distances
between each pair of points in the set S, 

s(i,j)= ||x(i)- x(j)||.

This gives us ||S||^2 values, and we can calculate sample
correlation functions C(r) with the formula:

C(r) = (1/||S||^2) * ( # of pairs (i,j) with s(i,j) < r )

These C(r) have been found to exhibit a power law like the one
we saw for capacity dimension:  C(r) = k*r^D; and we can aim to
find D with estimation techniques derived from the formula:
  
D =  lim    log[C(r)]  
     r-->0  ----------- 
              log(r)    


OPTICAL DEVICE FOR ESTIMATING CORRELATION DIMENSION!! 
Correlation dimension can be measured very directly with an
OPTICAL DEVICE.  Two films are prepared containing the sample
of points, in such a manner that light is able to pass through
the images of the points, but is blocked by the rest of the
film.  The two films are held parallel to each other while
light is focused on one of the films, and the total quantity of
light emerging from the second film is measured.  Light passing
through a point x on the first film shines on the second film,
over the surface of a disk centered on the image of x, and
having radius r determined by the distance between the films.
Thus the points at distance r or less from x on the second film
emanate light that came through the image of x on the first
film.  It is not hard to see that the total light emanating
from the second film is proportionate to C(r), the number of
pairs of points that are at distance r or less from each
other.  (This is true for wavelengths of incoherent light much
smaller than the size of the apertures representing the points
in the set.)  With such a device, it is thus possible to
rapidly calculate values of C(r) for various values of r, and
to arrive at an estimate of D.  This is potentially a superb
method of calculating D in terms of speed and cost
effectiveness.  The technique has been used by Lee and Moon
[Moon] on an experimental device, with excellent results. I
have not heard if such a device is yet commercially available.

THE CATCH?  IT'S ONLY GOOD FOR AN EMBEDDING
DIMENSION OF 1 OR 2. 
If the set S cannot be embedded in a plane, this optical
technique is not suitable.  (Is there hope for higher embedding
dimensions by using projections and reflectors??  We don't
know.)  


RELATIONS AMONG THE DIMENSIONS  

AN INEQUALITY RELATES THREE OF THE DIMENSIONS: 

correlation          information          capacity                
 dimension     <=     dimension     <=    dimension               

GETTING ALL THREE FROM THE SAME FORMULA!! 
Moon indicates that estimators of all three dimensions can be
derived from the same formula.  One takes

                       N(e)             
                      ____              
           1          \                 
I(q,e) = ----- log {  /____  P(m,e)^q  }
          1-q          m=1              

where P(i,e)^q is the q'th power of the proportion of the
points of S that lie in the i'th cell of a minimal covering by
cells of size e, and N(e) is the number of cells in such a
covering.  If we define 


         I(q,e) 
D(q) =  --------
         log(e) 

then for q=0, 1, and 2, D(q) is an estimator of capacity
dimension, information dimension, and correlation dimension,
respectively. (The limit of I(q,e) as q-->1 must be used in the
case of q = 1.)

THIS HAS MADE US REALIZE THAT ALL THREE CAN BE ESTIMATED IN
N*LOG(N) TIME! 
One of us noticed that the basic methodology reported in [L-T]
can be adapted to provide an algorithm for calculating good
estimates of the quantities P(i,e) in N*log(N) time, where N is
the number of points in the set S.  This made us realize that a
very fast algorithm exists for computing a good estimate of any
D(q) -- for any embedding dimension.  The fd3 program exploits
this idea to get estimates for q = 0, 1, and 2.

We must be careful, however, not to be over-trusting of the
values these algorithms give us.  We do not yet understand
enough about error bounds to make pronouncements about the
accuracy of such algorithms.  Nevertheless, these techniques
appear promising to us, and we are hopeful that a combination
of empirical and formal studies will prove them to be
adequate.  


POINTWISE DIMENSION

THE FORMULATION OF POINTWISE DIMENSION. 
The pointwise dimension is sensitive to the behavior of the set
in the vicinity of a specific point.  Let S be the sample of
the set whose dimension is to be estimated.  Let R be the
embedding space (if S is a subset of the (real) plane, then R
could be the plane.  R may be 3-D space, or whatever size space
is required to allow S to be a subset.)  Let B(r;x) denote the
set of all points in R whose distance from x is less than r.
B(r;x) is a disk if R is 2-D, and is a filled-in sphere if R is
3-D).  Let N(r,x) denote the number of elements of S contained
in B(r;x).  Let P(r,x) = N(r,x)/||S||, where ||S|| is the
number of points in S.  Then P(r,x) is a sample probability --
an estimate of the probability of finding a point of S inside
B(r;x).  It should be intuitively clear that P(r,x) will be
proportionate to r when S is a uniform sampling of a
1-dimensional set, and proportionate to r^2 when S is a uniform
sampling of a 2-dimensional set.  Thus, like we did in the
previous section, we might settle on the formula

P(r,x) = k*r^D(r,x),

and we might further assume that k = 1, as long as the points
are scaled so that the distance between each pair of them is
less than 1.  Note that D is a function of x in this
formulation, and that, in general, it would be possible for
different values of D to exist at different points x.  D is
also a function of r here, but we would expect there to be a
limit value of D as r tends to 0.  This leads to:  

D(x) = lim     log[P(r,x)] 
      r-->0   -------------
                  log(r)   

USING POINTWISE DIMENSION TO GET AN OVERALL FRACTAL DIMENSION
ESTIMATE: 
One may estimate D(x) by suitably averaging computed values of
log[P(r,x)]/log(r).  This gives us a way to measure the local
fractal properties of the set, near any of its points we care
to choose.  One may also estimate the overall fractal dimension
of S by averaging some of the estimates of D(x), or by working
with average values of P(r,x).



----------------------------------- 
REFERENCES:

[Moon] Chaotic Vibrations, Francis C. Moon, Wiley 1987, ISBN
0-471-85685- 1.

[L-T] Liebovitch and Toth, A Fast Algorithm To Determine
Fractal Dimensions By Box Counting, Physics Letters A,
141,386-390 (1989)


----------------------------------- 
information about the author of these notes:

John Sarraille, Professor,
Computer Science Dept,
CSU Stanislaus,
Turlock, CA 95380

e-mail: john@ishi.csustan.edu

----------------------------------- 
/* BEGIN NOTICE

Copyright (c) 1992 by John Sarraille and Peter DiFalco
(john@ishi.csustan.edu)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software
and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all
copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission
notice appear in supporting documentation.

The algorithm used in this program was inspired by the paper
entitled "A Fast Algorithm To Determine Fractal Dimensions By
Box Counting", which was written by Liebovitch and Toth, and
which appeared in the journal "Physics Letters A", volume 141,
pp 386-390, (1989).

This program is not warranteed: use at your own risk.

END NOTICE */
